>> Welcome to the Haskell Weekly podcast. This is a show
about Haskell, a purely functional programming
language. I'm your host, Taylor Fausak, the
lead engineer at ITProTV, an ACI
learning company. With me today is Cameron
Gera, one of the engineers on my team. Thanks for joining me
today, Cam.
>> Thanks for having me, Taylor. Pleasure as
always I'm just really excited about today. I
think we've got some great content ahead of us
going to be talking a little bit about a
language extension called type applications. So,
uh, if you're familiar with Haskell, you've probably heard of type
applications. If you're new to Haskell, well
then you're in for a special treat today. We're gonna kind of walk
through type applications. You know what? What's helpful
about it? What's, you know, maybe confusing about
it and really dive in to a
post that Zach Wood, uh,
wrote called Haskell's at
symbol type applications. So,
uh, to kick off,
he I think, probably works
with, uh, IHP, which is integrated
Haskell platform. And he is trying
to help explain, um, some of
the extensions that are
uh, kind of on by default
when you're using the the IHP platform. You know, uh,
framework, I believe, is really what it is at the end of the
day. Um and
so, yeah, tell us a little bit about
type applications. Taylor.
>> Yeah. For context. Like you mentioned,
the I H P is a framework for building Web
applications with Haskell. And if you're familiar with Ruby on
rails, I think it tries to be a lot like that. So
it aims to be very developer friendly,
and one of the things that you often want to
do with Haskell is have a function that is
polymorphic that could be used in a lot of different
contexts. But then you need to pick which
context you're using it in. So the example he gives is if you're
like, querying for something from the database,
that function should clearly allow you
to query for many different types of
things. Let's say like a user or an
episode for us. That's one of our data models.
Um, but you are gonna wanna pick
which thing you're querying for, so that's where type
applications can come in as a solution to that problem where you have this
polymorphic function, you say I want to use it with
this specific type.
>> Yeah, and you know, I think type
applications is a great way to fix this one
for us. We actually had this
kind of similar problem where we had a query that could return
all kinds of different things. And if we didn't use it in another
context, it couldn't figure out. You know
what type we were trying to query there. So we
actually used to do just kind of type
assertion at the variable
Declaration. So that was
you know, all right, we have user
whose colon colon type user and then that's
bound from the query that we were running.
So you know, that's why another way to
do what type application does
>> and funny note about that that requires a
different language extension called scoped
type variables, to be able to give a
type signature when you bind a variable so either on the
left side of one of the arrows in do notation or
on the left side of unequal sign in a let statement.
Otherwise you have to either give the
type signature on some other line later
in the function where use the thing or on the right
side, you would give, like colon colon, like io
user or the type of the whole expression where
the thing comes from rather than just that piece you care about.
>> Yeah. True. True. True. Yeah, thank you for that correction. But
yeah, that was also something we used to do before we even
had scope type variables. So
yeah, I think type applications
cleaned up the code a little bit over scope type
variables because, you know, we
could kind of read the functional, revered
writing and then say, Oh, hey, here's what type that
thing needs to return Or here's that, really.
Here's that type that needs to be filled into the polymorphic
piece of this function.
>> Yeah, and one of the reasons I think that we
didn't use type applications or scoped type
variables for a while is that in general, I try to avoid
using language extensions, but these ones, we had
enough polymorphic functions where the
utility was just undeniable. And instead of
ending up writing like a find
user function and find episode function and find
this, find that you just have one find
function and you pass the at type name for
the next thing. And it feels like you get a lot of the same
benefits as if you had a lot of different monomorphic
functions,
>> right? Right. And you know, I mean, I
know you. The habit is to shy away from
a language extension before, you know, going to it
until you see that use case. And I think for us, we really
did find that use case, Uh, you know, and
the nice thing about type applications as a language extension is
it's pretty well known around the community. And, you know,
it's even gonna be in the release of GHT 2021 which
we've talked about in previous podcast. So you know, there's
ah lot of community understanding on
tap type applications and you know, it's
something. There's a lot of, you know, tutorials on
what it does and how it works. Um, you know, and
this post is another opportunity to kind of
show what power it has. Um,
but, you know, we've been praising type applications a
lot, but I know there is one thing that's kind
of tricky when it comes to type
applications. And that's what like
when you put in that symbol in some
type, you think it may be a
variable to the function when it's really not,
Uh,
>> it's gonna be really confusing, because, uh, the
at sign you might think it could be used as an
operator. So if you had some identify
at sign some, some other identify that
could be a normal operator call like, plus or you know,
something like that. But it actually it can't be in
Haskell because the at sign is reserved for this
special thing when you bind
variables or when you match on them. So, like if you want to
match on a list and destructure the
head and the tail using colon, but you wanna
hang on to that overall list, you can do that with the at sign
so you do the like whole
term on the left and then at sign and
then some destructuring pattern on the
right. Um, so
that's one way that type applications could be a little
confusing is that this at sign is overloaded.
But fortunately, uh, the like
space around the operator is what
disambiguates it. So if you have a space before the at
sign, you know that it's gonna be a type application,
>> right? And then, yeah, I mean, and that's that's one
thing. The other thing, too, is you know, the order
of passing these type types through type
applications matters because, you know, if there's
multiple polymorphic variables in a function,
you have to make sure you pass this in order or you probably
get I mean, I imagine the compiler
errors were pretty helpful, but it could still be pretty confusing,
so
>> they might be pretty gnarly, especially if you have
types of different kinds. So, like
if one of your type arguments is meant to be
some monad, so it takes another type as an argument,
and you try to pass something like into that the kinds
aren't going to match up. And I think most Haskell programmers probably
don't run into that type of error very often, so it might be a little
mystifying. Um, but yeah, the
order of the argument is important, and
usually the order that type
variables appear in a type signature is
OK like that's the order that you would want to supply them,
but sometimes it's not right. You want to
change the order. So how would you do that?
>> Yeah, so that's our good
friend, the for all statement, right? Isn't that thing
>> yet? Another language extension?
>> Yeah. Which we don't tend to
use it very often on our day today. So for me, that's
a little fuzzy. So I'm gonna actually bounce that back to you and
ask Sure about it
>> So the way that I like to think
about for all is sort of a type
level lambda. I think pretty much any Haskell
programmer is gonna be comfortable writing a lambda with a
bunch of variables and then an arrow.
And for me for all is
kind of the same thing on the type level, where you
have the for all and then a bunch
of type variables and then a period. And then you have the type
signature after that. So it's a way
of explicitly listing all the type variables you're
going to use so that you can give them in a particular order.
>> Mhm. Okay,
I knew it was a thing in Haskell, but I didn't really
ever understand the reasoning for it,
Um, way generally don't have
super overly polymorphic functions where we have tell.
Yeah, and where the order always matters or something along
those lines. So for us,
you know, we haven't really run into that too much
personally.
>> Yeah, and it's kind of funny because the four
all is actually always there. It's
just implied that if you mention a type variable and
you haven't quantified it, if you haven't
given it by using one of these for all things,
then ghd will just do that for you. And
sometimes you'll see this on an error message where it'll print out a
type signature and we'll have a four all there. But it's not actually in
your source code, and you may wonder, where did that come from?
Ghd Just put it in there for you. It's
>> magic, you know, feel like today we could even talked
about G 9.0 point
one being released to know we have Yeah, it's got
that
>> got some fancy type stuff in there, but maybe we should do a
whole whole separate episode on that one. There's a lot
>> of time. That's where you're interested in.
It's out there, just, you know. Ah, friendly, Haskell
reminder for those who want to dive on into
that,
>> I mean, I just assume people are already reading the
newsletter right there. Already subscribed to the Haskell
weekly newsletter. I
mean,
>> if you're not, I would definitely go do it now.
It's just an email once a week. That's it. You don't
get too much information. It's not like he's We're trying to
sell you anything. Just trying to show you some
Haskell love, man.
>> Yeah, but on the topic of type applications, is there
anything else you wanted to cover here?
>> Uh, yeah. So,
um,
what else did I want to say? I wanted to say
something, but now I'm forgetting, which is great. Uh,
do you have anything you want to add? Because
I'm blanking at the moment. It's Friday afternoon, everybody. I'm
sorry.
>> Yeah. So we talked about some other
ways that we did stuff that type application
could do for us. So, like scope type variables, they're just manually giving a
type signature. One other very common
pattern that type applications replaces
is passing around proxy arguments.
So if you're not familiar, proxy is a data
type that
doesn't convey any information at the value
level. All of its information is in the type level.
So if you wanted to pass like the
pass a type to a function, you might do that
with a proxy. This is very common with the servant
library. That's how it passes around all this, a p I stuff and
lets you hold on to that as a value.
Um, but with type applications, you
don't really need to use proxy at all.
You can replace that with an explicit type application. So that's
nice. You just get rid of this concept altogether.
>> Yeah. I mean, for me, it's not. I mean,
I'm all for type applications. I think it's been a great quality of
life improvement for our code base.
Um, and as a, you know, engineer
helps me work faster and more
effectively. Um, and also
read code faster for the obviously. At first
it was really weird. I remember the engineer who
kind of like all about it. Cody, he was like, Hey,
let's do this. And I read that PR and I was just like,
Okay, I think I get it.
But at that point You know,
>> it takes a minute to wrap your head around, but I think
once you know what it does,
there's not really a downside to this language extension.
Some language extensions have a little bit of give and take. This one is just
give it lets you express something that you weren't able to do
before. Mhm.
>> Yeah, I think it's great. Um, is there anything else from the
Post that you were, uh, you know, interested
in or intrigued you? Because obviously, we talked a
little bit about the post, but not a ton. He was Yeah.
This is a great opportunity for us to have a good jumping off
point. Um, but we didn't really dive too
much into the actual post.
>> Um I mean, it was a great post. I really like
reading. Zach has put out a handful of posts, and I like reading
all of them. Um, this also gave me some good
insight or like, kind of day in the life
slice of life type stuff about I h p. I
haven't used it myself, but I've seen a lot of people excited
about it in the community, and I like what it's trying to do so. I like seeing posts like
this that give me a taste of it.
>> Yeah, I know. I think he's gonna have to do some follow up post,
too, because he's got two other language extension. He's use
in the posts that he actually had comments in the post
about which is really and he was very quick to react.
So I'm sure if you have more questions. I think Zach's got you
>> Exactly.
>>  Exactly.
>> Dude you can't escape the puns. I didn't
mean to. Wow, just subconsciously
punning all the time.
>> That's life.
>> Um, but yeah, Cam, like you mentioned, I think next week
we'll have to talk about GH c nine. But I think that will do
it for us this week. Unless you get anything else.
>> I don't think so. I mean, it's a great quick
topic. Um, I mean,
I think the only other thing I was thinking about talking about with
examples of you, but you think we should talk about
some examples like it's really good
>> he gives a couple in the post, right?
>> Right. He uses reading show is a great examples because, you
know, read takes a string and returns today and show takes a
name, returns a string. Uh, you can for the
read function, you could assert it,
or you could always write a wrapper function that
gives it explicit types. But if you don't wanna do that,
you can just type applications to say, Hey, I
want this string 1234 or 1234
to become an int and you just do read
at ent this string. So it'll
transform it and obviously create a run time
error if you can't do that. But
you know it tries which, you know, I think that was a great
example. Some more for us that we
see on a more day to day basis is, you know,
from from integral or
realToFrac to transform one
integral type to another integral type
>> these are Like the Swiss Army knife
conversion functions, they're used for so many things,
like from a machine sized integer into
some specific sized incised, unsigned
integer, or like from a database type
into a normal type or from a time. Or, you
know, just all kinds of things have surprising instances where
you can convert it with from integral on, and
a lot of times I encourage people to write
monomorphic rapper functions like specifically from this
type of that type. But with type applications, you
can say from integral at this type at that
type and then you don't need to write that extra function. You just kind of define
it in line as it were.
>> Yeah, which, you know, pros and
cons. But if you're kind of
familiar with the extension,
I think it's a easy thing to grok. You know,
obviously, if you're new to a code base and you've never seen
type application before, yeah, you would be like wait a second. Why
is this that way? We should just made it a separate function.
>> But that actually reminds me,
um, one thing we didn't touch on yet that I think we should
is that with type applications,
sometimes a function will have, Let's
say, to type variables, and you want
to only supply the second one. So
you're like whatever the first one is. If you want to infer it,
that's fine. But the second one needs to be int,
and you can do that with type applications, where,
instead of saying at some type name you say
at Underscore and that tells G h
c go ahead and do what you were going to do here. Anyway,
Just pretend I'm not here and I'll do the next thing,
>> right? And that's you know where that order matters. Because if you
try to just apply the second one it would infer it as the
first one, right?
>> like with from integral. If if in your
context, the first type variable is already picked for
you. So you don't wanna specify it again, You would
say from integral at underscore at
int. And then that would say, I'm converting into an integer.
>> Right? But that's Yeah, super nice little
thing that type applications
gave us so much. Appreciate it. Thank
you, programmers. Who created this?
>> Great. Yeah, that's a good one.
Uh, so, yeah, I feel like we've we've
said we're almost done for a couple times here, but I think we're actually almost done now.
>> Yeah, I think so. I mean, you know, I wanted to give us
some good content. I was like, What? We need
examples, So yeah, Glad we got that
opportunity. Sorry, but yeah, the emotional roller
coaster off our listeners.
>> Are we over? Are we not? We were over.
Thank you. Okay. No, no, there's no more.
Uh, yeah. Thank you for listening to the high
school weekly podcast. I have been your host, Taylor Fausak.
And with me today was Cameron Gera. If you want to find
out more about Haskell Weekly, you can go to our website
haskellweekly.news And if you
enjoyed the show, please rate and review us on apple
podcasts. And if you have any feedback for us,
tweet us at Haskell Weekly
>> And Haskell Weekly is brought to you by ITProTV and
A C I learning company and our employer.
They would like to offer you 30% off your
subscription by using promo code
HASKELLWEEKLY30 at check
out. And that about does it for us, huh? Taylor?
>> Sure does.
>> Well, thanks for joining us this week on Haskell Weekly, and
we'll see you next week.
>> Bye.